i mean 40 million americans have a
clinical anxiety that's only like 18
million americans have depression
i think i was looking into aspects of my
life to try and identify what was
causing my reaction because when you get
anxious you try and identify what in
your life is making you anxious
anxiety is simply you living in a future
state
worrying about something that has not
actually happened
it's the moment you can you suddenly see
that those distorted thoughts aren't
true
you can change
[Applause]
[Music]
first of all
comparison is the thief of joy so be
careful just outright comparing yourself
to other people and in fact
understanding what anxiety is at like
its most
foundational level i think is going to
be really helpful
anxiety is simply it is literally
nothing more than this it is simply you
living in a future state
worrying about something that has not
actually happened
and what you're doing is what i call
rehearsing failure
so you're looking at somebody else
you're seeing how amazing they are
you're imagining your future and you're
saying you know i'm never going to live
up to what they've done i'm never going
to accomplish that level now you can
imagine that's very different than
saying oh look at what they've done
that's so incredible i'm super inspired
and i'm going to get that good i may not
be that good yet but i'm going to get
that good now one of those rehearsals
creates anxiety that i'm never going to
be that good
the other one reduces anxiety and it
actually puts you in an action-oriented
state now action cures all that's one of
my
like just dead reckoning things that i
say to myself all the time action cures
all so when you look at somebody that's
killing it in a way that you want to
kill it step number one is to just
recognize that you can get good you can
get better that is just the nature of
the human animal
you don't need to believe you're special
you just have to recognize the truth of
the human condition so anything you put
energy and effort into getting better at
you will actually get better at anything
that you rehearse over and over and over
anything you repeat is going to become
real mentally so if you look at someone
else and say i'm never going to be that
i'm never going to be that good i'm a
loser i'm a failure whatever that's the
thing that you repeat you're
catastrophizing okay to use the language
of cognitive behavioral therapy but
you're not if you're not familiar with
that that is the number one defense
against anxiety read the book feeling
great
absolutely phenomenal book about how you
stop
the cognitive distortions as they're
known and get into a state where
you are in that calm state that you're
looking for this is the task that we all
have
we all go through
difficult things horrible things
heartbreaking things the kinds of things
that we wouldn't wish on somebody else
but the job that we all have is in the
face of that
we have to construct a narrative about
it
that moves us forward
and this is why i'm such a firm believer
that you should do
and believe
that which moves you towards your goals
and i see people every day
that tell themselves the story about
themselves that they are worthless
that they're meaningless
that they're pointless
that their friends and family would be
better off if they just died
so we have to find a way to construct a
narrative about ourselves
that empowers us that lifts us up
even though
even though we make mistakes even though
we fall down even though
we're never going to get things right
all the time and even though terrible
things happen to us
like honestly i think the uh
i wouldn't underestimate the ssri
withdrawal i had i think that the
anxiety and the this this horrifying
impending sense of doom i had like i
said for about two years after i stopped
taking ssris i think i was looking into
aspects of my life to try and identify
what was causing
uh
my reaction because when you get anxious
you try and identify what in your life
is making you anxious and so i had you
know my my dad was
randomly getting controversially famous
which was incredibly stressful for my
family so that was a real source of
stress and then i had a surprise
pregnancy which is was a serious real
source of stress uh and i think i was
partly trying to
reduce the amount of chaos in my life
in any way possible and then yeah i was
definitely
i definitely partially felt pressured um
there was some family pressure
and there was some kind of neighborhood
pressure we moved to this it wasn't a
suburb of toronto because it was still
in toronto but it was kind of on the
outskirts and everyone there was 35 and
they had kids
and
i was pregnant and they were like
there was judgment there about not being
married and there was also like what do
you do as a job which is a weird thing
to ask a pregnant person which is like
what do you do as a job well like
currently i'm having a child like that's
my job at the moment um so i think i was
just trying to reduce the amount of
chaos in my life by making things as
ordered and structured as possible and
one of the things i thought
might help and my family thought might
help was getting married
[Music]
now the second idea is that when you're
depressed and anxious again it's not the
events of your life that are upsetting
you it's it's the messages you're giving
yourself the way you're interpreting
events
and when you're depressed you're giving
yourself messages like i'm not as good
as i should be and there's a lot of
people listening right now who
are thinking that
and uh
or if you're shy you may be thinking you
know why am i so shy i'm really screwed
up
there must be something wrong with me
depressed people often feel discouraged
or hopeless and then you're telling
yourself
things will never change
this is my true self i really am a loser
i'll be this way
forever and
now and the really uh amazing thing that
that's been kind of known what i just
said
more or less for 2000 years but what's
really kind of new and awesome
is that the thoughts that trigger
depression and anxiety are not valid
thoughts depression and anxiety is the
world's
oldest con
and you're you're fooling yourself but
you don't you don't realize it
and then
the final
message from cognitive behavioral
therapy is the very moment you change
the way you think in other words the
moment you can you suddenly see that
those distorted thoughts aren't true and
you stop believing them in that instant
you can change
because you know a lot of people
listening i mean 40 million americans
have clinical anxiety something like 18
million americans have depression but
let's just say you know the lifetime
incident of depression
uh
pretty high i mean at one point if you
looked at data like uh i always want to
get the study right but i remember i saw
a shocking statistic years ago that if
something like a quarter of women of
child bearing age were taking an
antidepressant
so you you see well this you know it
seems high but the regular statistic
just of the whole population is about 12
11 to 12 percent and it seems high right
but it's sort of hard as a psychiatrist
you see those numbers and some of that
says well it's good that people are
getting treatment
you know like what do those numbers mean
and and
what we also know is no matter
how many folks are aren't taking meds a
lot of people aren't getting into full
remission
[Music]
and so what starts as a somewhat minor
concern about not being as cool as the
next person not accomplishing as much as
they do not being as smart or as
talented whatever
and it becomes
this
full-blown i mean this can really go
into like full-blown panic attack
syndrome
because you're repeating it
the more you feel it
the higher the anxiety so it's a
positive feedback loop so i feel anxious
about this which makes me more anxious
about this which makes me think about it
and worry about it more and so now my
brain is wiring it and the amplitude is
going up and so when you get into a
positive feedback loop like that that's
destructive now you're in a really
dangerous place so step number one
don't compare yourself in
to others in a way other than i could
become that with enough time and energy
and effort put into it
and then number two recognize that when
you have a cognitive distortion like
catastrophizing i'll never be that good
right you don't have evidence to support
that and even if you do
it does not serve you to spend time
catastrophizing so you are way better
off just from a neurochemical standpoint
you are way better off doing what's
called a pattern interrupt
stopping yourself from thinking that and
instead of saying so the nice simple
pattern interrupt here i'm never going
to be that good wait
pattern interrupt i'm not that good yet
but i can get that good okay and that
becomes the way that you break that
cycle and the only way to undo that
anxiety is to let it atrophy
now the fastest way to make something
atrophy is to
focus on something else so now the thing
that we're going to replace that
catastrophizing with that's hard wiring
into our brain is we're going to replace
it with
the way the human animal works i can get
good at anything right so if it's what i
call the only belief that matters if i
put time and attention into getting
better at this thing i will actually get
better that is the nature of the human
animal and so i would just repeat that i
can get good at anything i can get good
at anything and so that becomes my
pattern interrupt that becomes the thing
now that i'm reinforcing in my mind that
becomes the thought that hardwires that
becomes the feeling that hardwires you
know you present people with this
they're just feeling absolutely
horrendous and the most powerful example
i think you have of this is the mother
of the little girl who was shot in the
face with a pellet gun and it explodes
one of her or multiple of her teeth
perhaps and multiple surgeries and the
mother had let her go out to play and so
it's like oh man she's beating herself
up over it i never should have let her
go out i'm a terrible mother you know my
daughter is suffering how could i ever
allow myself to be happy again um
how how did you help her
realize that hitting the magic button
and making all of that anxiety and all
of that you know shame and guilt like
how on earth did you make her see that
guilt and shame and anxiety are actually
positive well that's the really fun fun
thing you see
she'd been suffering for for nine years
since her daughter had been shot at the
age of 12 and she blamed herself that
she said i shouldn't have let her go out
to play that night
uh so i'm a bad mother and just horrible
nine years and so said tor f we
empathized uh i was treating her in
front of a live audience
and
i i said now if there's a magic button
here i said well first of all what do
you want out of this session if a
miracle happens what miracle would you
want she said well i i feel better i'm
so so tired of feeling 100 guilty 100
anxious and 100
ashamed and 100 depressed and hopeless
and angry
and i said well let's imagine there's a
magic button here and if you press it
you'll be instantly cured with no effort
and you'll go into a state of euphoria
will you press that button
just absolutely i'd press it in a
heartbeat every everyone says that they
say well we don't have a magic button
but i've got some incredible techniques
but i i don't think it would be such a
good idea to use those techniques
uh
and i just said
well why not you know this is what i
need i've been trying for nine years to
get over my my depression i said well
before we use those techniques
let's see what all your negative
thoughts and feelings show about you
that's positive and and awesome although
now let's say your sadness and
depression
to start out with
you've been horribly depressed because
your 12 year old daughter for nine years
has had surgeries and unsuccessful
treatment for post-traumatic stress
disorder and she's been pretty miserable
so if you press the magic button you'll
be joyous and happy
so you're saying you want to be joyous
and happy about the fact that your
daughter's been
suffering for nine years
she said oh no
that doesn't sound right
so i said what does your sadness show
about you that's positive and awesome
she says it shows how much i love my
daughter
so put that down is that real
is that powerful is that important she
said absolutely
and then
you you're you're telling yourself uh
that the people here in the audience are
judging you that was another one of her
negative thoughts they think you're a
bad mother and you think you're a bad
mother what does that thought show about
you that's positive and awesome the fact
that you're concerned that the people in
the audience here may judge you she says
i guess it shows that i want
a
positive loving relationships with them
and is that true she says absolutely i
said is that important she says
absolutely so put that down shows that i
want loving relationships with with the
people here in the group and then you're
very self-critical you're beating up on
yourself constantly
i'm a bad mother i'm a failure i
shouldn't have done this i you know i
should have done
done that what what is that show about
you that's positive and awesome she says
well maybe that i have high
standards i said absolutely is that true
she says yes and i said have you have
your high standards helped you she says
oh yes i do everything i can to help my
daughter and and i got a phd in clinical
psychology i've achieved a lot and i
said is that important and she says
absolutely i said what else does all
this self-criticism show about you
that that's positive and and awesome
and she says well maybe humility
i'm not like bragging about about myself
i said is that important humility she
says yes i'm a very religious person
that's it's a spiritual principle to put
down humility and then uh and you're
anxious all the time
if you press the magic button your
anxiety will go away but what are some
good things about your anxiety she said
it keeps me vigilant to protect my
daughter daughter the last time i let
down my my guard
she got shot in the face
uh so i guess you're saying your anxiety
is is your love for your daughter she
says absolutely so she puts that down
and then you're angry is that valid
what are some beautiful things about
your anger she says well
the parents of those boys never should
have let them go out and play with other
children with a loaded rifle
uh
and so so what does your anger show
about you karen that's awesome she said
well i'm like an angry mother bear i'm
gonna protect my daughter i'm not gonna
let those parents get away with with
that and and i said is that important
she says absolutely so we came up with a
list of about 25
beautiful things about her depression
and anxiety and shame and guilt and
anger
and hopelessness even the hopelessness
is even a good thing because it prevents
her from getting disappointed getting
her hoops up like it doesn't make sense
that you could sit down with dr burns
for one session and be cured
that's like a snake oil salesman so your
hopelessness shows that you're a
critical thinker
and it prevents you from getting
horribly uh
get your hopes up and they then get all
disappointed at the end of the evening
she said absolutely so then i said well
look at given all these beautiful things
about you we've listed 25 beautiful
things about you
that that
that are all expressions
you know of these these negative
feelings that you have these negative
feelings because of these beautiful
things about you and if you press that
magic button they'll all go down the
drain along with your negative feelings
is that what you want
she says no i i don't want to suffer but
i don't want to give up all these
positive core values that i have
and then
we said well maybe
we can make a little compromise here
maybe instead of pressing that magic
button will have a magic dial and you
can dial them down to a lower level but
not to zero
so so how sad would you want to be at
the end of the evening it's a hundred
right now she said oh ten percent is
enough
they said is are you sure that's enough
could i sell you on 20.
now i'm in the position of trying to
persuade her to be more upset
you see rather than try to sell her on
something which only would trigger
resistance and then so she dialed them
to zero she felt the shame she didn't
need any shame and one of them she only
needed two percent and
some of them she wanted 10
and that type of thing and now i've made
a deal with her subconscious mind with
her resistance that will dial them down
to these levels but no further and then
i said now karen that i have to advise
you about one thing the techniques we're
going to use are so powerful
that you might overshoot your goals
like your depression may go all the way
from 100 to zero rather than to 10 but
don't worry because if it goes if you
get too happy i'll try to i'll help you
work your depression up to 10 before the
end of the evening then she started
laughing and at that point i knew i had
her
[Music]
and so i stopped rehearsing failure i
started rehearsing success and i just
said i'm gonna let failure take me
totally by surprise if it ever happens
because i'm never going to allow myself
to think about it and so now anytime i
find myself like ooh
that could be like a risky situation i
say to myself no no this is an
opportunity for me to shine this is
going to be amazing i'm going to kill it
i'm going to get out there i'm prepared
i always prepare myself you know that
you're ready to rock and roll let's do
the damn thing and because that's what i
start repeating in my head now when i
think about something like that i'm
not nervous i've rehearsed that feeling
good
i say those things to myself in an
elevated state so i'm excited about them
and so now all of a sudden i'm
rehearsing this feeling good i'm
rehearsing it being fun and so that's
what comes to mind when i enter what
used to be a very stressful situation
when somebody as intelligent as you
understands the power of being sexy how
do you deal with that
okay so it used to make me angrier
um and especially
being in charge of my dad's business
and having
business conversations with
particularly with men but it's not just
men it's also with women uh
because of the way i look
i'm immediately put into this category
of like stupid young blonde
woman who has
only
only had any type of influence because
of her dad
right so i i immediately know what kind
of little box i'm put into
and it used to make me really frustrated
and angry
and now i just find it funny mostly so i
played up the like we had a times
just a terrible article written about my
dad and i and i was in that article way
too much in the times earlier this year
and she called me some sort of what did
she say pouting barbie
and i and
and so
i've decided to embrace it really like
you know what yeah okay fine i can do
both sorry if that makes some people
angry but is it bad like is it worse
than just doing one like if i'm smart do
i have to be
like frumpy
like is it is it just one and
instagram is tricky so
it's tricky because you're navigating
like how to spread
awareness about your brand
and so i can put out these podcast clips
which is 95 of my content as podcast
clips uh and they get interaction people
enjoy them people share them but then
if i you know every freaking i don't
know two months or three months put out
a bikini photo
then
you know a quarter of the comments are
people like how could you do this how
could you do this
and then
the other but then it like i i said it
gets like 10 times as much engagement
and then my followers grow and then more
people become aware of my podcast
so i think i'd be stupid not to plus i'm
actually really really proud of the fact
that i look okay because
i didn't look okay for a while like i
had my hip and ankle replaced my skin
was
like dying i was really not okay and
i've managed to pull myself out of that
like
exercise eat on this really strict diet
to keep myself healthy and i look good
and so i also want to show people that
hey i went from you know that to this
and you can too it's not just me
and
showing how my body looks is a really
effective way of doing that
[Music]
so this gets to an interesting
intersection that drives my fascination
with this which is
all right as somebody who struggled with
anxiety i can tell you diet exacerbates
it but i still need a trigger of some
something of an emotional nature so it
becomes really hard to tell
is this something that i ate or
you know have been shifting my
microbiome over the last month in a
direction that's not very useful or is
it i'm just freaked out about this thing
how do you help people begin to tease
that out
i think that's the question that we're
in and that nutritional psychiatry tries
to help people sort out because it can
be all of those things
i am first and foremost a therapist i
love long form listening to people's
free flow unconscious and helping them
find the meaning in it and the purpose
in that so when you tell me there's a
your your home of anxiety i would say
one that's probably one of the reasons
you're quite successful it's a i wrote a
piece for men's health called your
anxiety is your superpower and and and i
think that's true for a lot of people
and then when it perks up as you know i
would say part of you
taming or mastering or say riding your
anxiety is you find the meaning in that
and so that's one reason it goes down
then there's that what i consider more
biological anxiety you wake up in the
morning with a panic your heart is
racing now again that can be psychology
there are things that do that to us that
freak us out whether it's
grieving or loss or parenthood or
intimacy i mean that that happens but
there's something when it's biologic
that we really feel and that's where i
think food really does play a role if
you think about your brain as the lens
through which you're filtering all this
data right is is the line on the screen
a line on the screen or is it actually
in the room with you about to eat you
your your brain is very good at sorting
that out um
and
and if we think about the quality of
that lens really being influenced by a
few things or a few processes one you
mentioned like the microbiome that's
really talking about inflammation right
how's this word of inflammation affect
the brain if we think about it in terms
of my favorite concept these days
neuroplasticity right brain growth and
brain change over time
definitely food influences that there
are a bunch of
specific molecular mechanisms where we
can see that now one thing that you're
really known for that we haven't touched
on is diet you mentioned something
earlier that i thought i want to ask
about that but now that it's much later
into the episode and we will have weeded
through a lot of uh sort of casuals i
want to ask you said that your
daughter's diet is really good what is
your daughter's diet is she eating
beef and salt
oh god no
that would be insane like
eating beef and salt sucks
it fixed all my health problems and i
can i can full on say that it fixed all
my health problems but it wasn't fun it
sucks i miss foods so no i
i am so careful with her diet though
like i am the most neurotic
mother on the planet probably with her
diet because i had no idea how much of
my issues were genetic like they're not
obviously genetic i don't have some
weird genetic glitch that i'm aware of
um but i was like well this depression
came down on my dad's side my mom has
arthritis
celiac disease is in there somewhere or
at least a wheat sensitivity so i was
like how much of this is genetic
um and i'm so i was so sick
it was like how much of that could i
pass on to scarlet
whether that's through like microbiome
or
genes or whatever i was like i don't
want to trigger anything
um when she's young so then
do you feed
little kids a whole bunch of foods so
that you dampen down their immune system
or do you feed them the foods you think
are healthy and i went the route of
feeding her the foods i thought were
healthy and so
i breastfed for a long time we started
out with introducing like meat and meat
fat because that was pretty similar to
breast milk i was like that's a pretty
easy transition
breast milk meat fat meat and then
really slowly started to introduce more
foods and
she's
healthy so she's three and a half
super healthy like i've said but she can
kind of identify when she's eating too
much of something so right now she eats
like
she mainly eats meat and she has some
vegetables and some fruit she doesn't
have dairy she doesn't have grain she
doesn't have any processed foods
um she doesn't do legumes
it's basically
vegetables fruit and meat
and she's thrilled with that she doesn't
drink juice she drinks water right so
it's pretty
it's pretty strict
but
if she eats too much fruit
she'll get a bit bloated and
she knows that she ate too much fruit
right so i figured that if i had been
little and i had been more restricted in
my diet maybe until i was like six or
seven i think i probably would have been
able to intuitively eat
right so when i started cutting things
out when i was 23 and i started to
intuitively eat and say okay i ate this
and it makes me feel this way i think
you have to get to a certain age to be
able to do that i don't think
two-year-olds could do that i think if
you give two-year-olds candy they're
gonna feast on candy right so i don't
think you can say oh just you know just
eat a little bit of candy to a
two-year-old so i think if you feed them
and you teach them to eat intuitively i
figure by the time she's in school
and she goes over to people's houses and
she eats their food
my hope is that if she ends up not
feeling good because of something she
ate
she'll be kind of like clear enough and
clean enough that she'll be able to
identify that herself and then she can
make her own decisions but until she's
you know five or so i'm prioritizing
like healthy fats a lot of meat
vegetables and
limiting she still eats fruit but she
can't like gorge on fruit and like i
said she drinks water so
i guess we'll see how that turns out but
at the moment it's great she had
sugar once
in sausages that my mom bought
when she was two when she was just
eating meat
and she
turned into one of those you know those
tantrum children that you see in
airports and you're like what is wrong
with their parents that are just
screaming
she screamed like that in that like
angry for like a day after the sausages
and it was not very much sugar in those
sausages yeah and i was like whoa i do
not want that like that's terrifying the
tantrum-y toddler screams she doesn't
have tantrums she'll get overtired and
cry but she doesn't have tantrums i've
never met a toddler that doesn't have
tantrums i'm like how much of tantrums
or sugar i don't know but scarlet seems
to be doing great so i'm just gonna keep
doing this
that's interesting yeah when people come
to me and you know they have a problem
hey i'm anxious hey i'm depressed uh my
cat died whatever i'm like it's your
diet i guarantee but tom it's static on
my tv i don't care it's your diet i just
promise you
and i came to that you know not i did
not go through what you have gone
through not by any stretch of the
imagination but watching what my wife
went through which was brutal and i
actually worried at one point she was
going to die i was like uh
yeah why you eat matters it matters a
lot what you eat ate
matters
and i never thought that i would say
that so it's yeah could tantrums be tied
to diet absolutely
it is startling how much is tied to diet
because i think there is
there is going to be a revolution
i think in how we're living i think uh
in terms of really people who are
wanting to optimize their health not
wanting to squeeze in a two-week
vacation someplace nice in the sun but
to live a life where there's more nature
and more exercise and more groundedness
and connectedness i think the pandemics
really accentuated that i think food is
one of those pieces of it that we have a
lot of control over it's why i like it
as a factor in mental health i think
it's where it's different than our other
treatments right whether prozac works
for you or zoloft or lithium like
we're both crossing our fingers when i
prescribe those that they work and they
do for a lot of people and they don't
for some people same thing with
psychotherapy
and you don't really control that too
much a little bit but
whether food can work for you whether
there's nourishment or whether there are
certain nutrients that your brain needs
that really most americans aren't
getting and i think
that's one of the things that connects
we're talking about a rural city you
know kind of urban divide one thing
that's interesting is both of those
places have horrible mental health
crises
it's not like country living
is like free of depression and anxiety
and another thing that connects that is
as much as there is a wellness movement
the general american diet in both of
those places is just really atrocious
and damaging to brain health
all right my friends i hope this added
value to you if it did make sure that
you smash the like button make sure that
you are subscribed and that you don't
miss a thing and until next time my
friends be legendary take care